@node Forth Words
@chapter Forth Words

@menu
* Stack Manipulation::
* Utility::
* Mathematics::
* Double::
* Logic::
* Memory::
* Compiling::
* Word List::
* Values::
* Variables::
* Control Flow::
* Input::
* Editing::
* Strings::
* Number Formatting::
* Vectored Execution::
* Debugging::
* System State::
* Disk I/O::
* Compatibility::
* Kernel Calls::
* Turn-key Utilities::
@end menu

@node Stack Manipulation
@set SECTION Stack Manipulation
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn Stack drop ( a -- )

Drop top of stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack dup ( a -- a a )

Duplicate top of stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack swap ( a b -- b a )

Swap top stack elements.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack over ( a b -- a b a )

Make a copy of the second item and push it on top.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack rot ( a b c -- b c a )

Rotate the third item to the top.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack -rot ( a b c -- c a b )

rot rot

@end deffn
@deffn Stack 2drop ( a b -- )

Drop two topmost stack elements.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack 2dup ( a b -- a b a b )

Duplicate two topmost stack elements.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack ?dup ( a -- a a? )

Dup a if a differs from 0.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack nip ( a b -- b )

swap drop

@end deffn
@deffn Stack tuck ( a b -- b a b )

dup -rot

@end deffn
@deffn Stack pick ( x@sub{u} ... x@sub{1} x@sub{0} u -- x@sub{u} ... x@sub{1} x@sub{0} x@sub{u} )

Pick from stack element with depth u to top of stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack >r ( a -- )

Move value from top of parameter stack to top of return stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack r> ( -- a )

Move value from top of return stack to top of parameter stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack r@@ ( -- a )

Copy value from top of return stack to top of parameter stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack depth ( -- n)

@code{n} is the number of single-cell values contained in the data stack
before @code{n} was placed on the stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack lsb ( -- addr )

The top address of the LSB parameter stack.

@end deffn
@deffn Stack msb ( -- addr )

The top address of the MSB parameter stack.
@end deffn

@node Utility
@set SECTION Utility
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn Utility . ( n -- )

Prints top value of stack as signed number.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility u. ( u -- )

Prints top value of stack as unsigned number.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility .s

See stack contents.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility emit ( a -- )

Prints top value of stack as a PETSCII character. Example:
@code{'q' emit}
@end deffn

@deffn Utility £

Comment to end of line. (Used on C64/PETSCII.)
@end deffn

@deffn Utility \

Comment to end of line. (Used when cross-compiling from PC/ASCII.)
@end deffn

@deffn Utility (

Multiline comment. Ignores everything until a ).
@end deffn

@deffn Utility bl ( -- char )

Gives the PETSCII character for a space.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility space

Displays one space.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility spaces ( n -- )

Displays n spaces.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility page

Clears the screen.
@end deffn

@deffn Utility rvs

Reverse screen output.
@end deffn

@node Mathematics
@set SECTION Mathematics
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn Mathematics 1+ ( a -- b )

Increase top of stack value by 1.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics 1- ( a -- b )

Decrease top of stack value by 1.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics 2+ ( a -- b )

Increase top of stack value by 2.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics 2* ( a -- b )

Multiply top of stack value by 2.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics 2/ ( a -- b )

Divide top of stack value by 2.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics 100/ ( a -- b )

Divides top of stack value by @code{\$100}.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics +! ( n a -- )

Add n to memory address a.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics + ( a b -- c )

Add a and b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics - ( a b -- c )

Subtract b from a.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics * ( a b -- c )

Multiply a with b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics / ( a b -- q )

Divide a with b using floored division.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics /mod ( a b -- r q )

Divide a with b, giving remainder r and quotient q.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics mod ( a b -- r )

Remainder of a divided by b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics */ ( a b c -- q )

Multiply a with b, then divide by c, using a 32-bit intermediary.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics */mod ( a b c -- r q )

Like */, but also keeping remainder r.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics 0< ( a -- b )

Is a negative?
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics negate ( a -- b )

Negates a.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics abs ( a -- b )

Gives absolute value of a.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics min ( a b -- c )

Gives the lesser of a and b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics max ( a b -- c )

Gives the greater of a and b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics within ( n lo hi -- flag )

Returns true if lo @math{<=} n @math{<} hi.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics @math{<} ( n1 n2 -- flag )

Is n1 less than n2? (Signed.)
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics @math{>} ( n1 n2 -- flag )

Is n1 greater than n2? (Signed.)
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics u@math{<} ( u1 u2 -- flag )

Is u1 less than u2? (Unsigned.)
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics u@math{>} ( u1 u2 -- flag )

Is u1 greater than u2? (Unsigned.)
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics lshift ( a b -- c )

Binary shift a left by b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics rshift ( a b -- c )

Binary shift a right by b.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics base (variable)

Points to the cell that holds the numerical base.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics decimal

Sets the numerical base to 10.
@end deffn

@deffn Mathematics hex

Sets the numerical base to 16.
@end deffn

@node Double
@set SECTION Double
@section @value{SECTION}
The following words use double-cell integers. On the stack, the cell
containing the most significant part of a double-cell integer is above
the cell containing the least significant part.

@deffn Double dabs ( d -- ud )

Produces the absolute value of d.
@end deffn

@deffn Double dnegate ( d -- d )

Negates the double-cell integer d.
@end deffn

@deffn Double s@math{>}d ( n -- d )

Converts the number n to the double-cell number d.
@end deffn

@deffn Double m+ ( d n -- d )

Add n to double-cell number d.
@end deffn

@deffn Double m* ( a b -- d )

Multiply a with b, producing a double-cell value.
@end deffn

@deffn Double um* ( a b -- ud )

Multiply a with b, giving the unsigned double-cell number ud.
@end deffn

@deffn Double um/mod ( ud n -- r q )

Divide double-cell number ud by n, giving remainder r and quotient q.
Values are unsigned.
@end deffn

@deffn Double fm/mod ( d n -- r q )

Divide double-cell number d by n, giving the floored quotient q and the
remainder r. Values are signed.
@end deffn

@node Logic
@set SECTION Logic
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn Logic 0= ( a -- flag)

Is a equal to zero?
@end deffn

@deffn Logic 0@math{<>} ( a -- flag )

Is a not equal to 0?
@end deffn

@deffn Logic = ( a b -- flag )

Is a equal to b?
@end deffn

@deffn Logic @math{<>} ( a b -- flag )

Does a differ from b?
@end deffn

@deffn Logic and ( a b -- c )

Binary and.
@end deffn

@deffn Logic or ( a b -- c )

Binary or.
@end deffn

@deffn Logic xor ( a b -- c )

Binary exclusive or.
@end deffn

@deffn Logic invert ( a -- b )

Flip all bits of a.
@end deffn

@node Memory
@set SECTION Memory
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn Memory ! ( value address -- )

Store 16-bit value at address.
@end deffn

@deffn Memory @@ ( address -- value )

Fetch 16-bit value from address.
@end deffn

@deffn Memory c! ( value address -- )

Store 8-bit value at address.
@end deffn

@deffn Memory c@@ ( address -- value )

Fetch 8-bit value from address.
@end deffn

@deffn Memory fill ( addr len char -- )

Fill range [addr, len + addr) with char.
@end deffn

@deffn Memory move ( src dst len -- )

Copies a region of memory @code{len} bytes long, starting at @code{src},
to emory beginning at @code{dst}.
@end deffn

@node Compiling
@set SECTION Compiling
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} : (C: "@math{<}spaces@math{>}name" -- )

Define the word with the given name and enter compilation state.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} :noname ( -- xt )

Create an execution token and enter compilation state.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ; ( -- )

End the current definition, allow it to be found in the dictionary and
go back to interpretation state.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} code ( "@math{<}spaces@math{>}name" -- )

Start assembling a new word.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ;code

End assembler.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} , ( n -- )

Write word on stack to @code{here} position and increase @code{here} by
2.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} c, ( n -- )

Write byte on stack to @code{here} position and increase @code{here} by
1.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} allot ( n -- )

Add n bytes to the body of the most recently defined word.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} literal ( n -- )

Compile a value from the stack as a literal value. Typical use:
@code{: x ... [ a b * ] literal ... ;}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} [char] c

Compile character @code{c} as a literal value.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} [ ( -- )

Leave compile mode. Execute the following words immediately instead of
compiling them.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ] ( -- )

Return to compile mode.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} immediate

Mark the most recently defined word as immediate (i.e. inside colon
definitions, it will be executed immediately instead of compiled).
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ['] name ( -- xt )

Place name's execution token xt on the stack. The execution token
returned by the compiled phrase @code{['] x} is the same value returned
by @code{' x} outside of compilation state. Typical use:
@code{: x ... ['] name ... ;}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} compile, ( xt -- )

Append @code{jsr xt} to the word being compiled. Typical use:
@code{: recurse immed latest >xt compile, ;}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} postpone xxx

Compile the compilation semantics (instead of interpretation semantics)
of xxx. Typical use:

@verbatim
: endif postpone then ; immediate
: x ... if ... endif ... ;
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} header xxx

Create a dictionary header with name @code{xxx}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} create xxx/does@math{>}

Create a word creating word @code{xxx} with custom behavior specified
after @code{does>}. For further description, see "Starting Forth."
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} state ( -- addr)

addr is the address of a cell containing the compilation-state flag. It
is 1 when compiling, otherwise 0.
@end deffn

@node Word List
@set SECTION Word List
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} hide xxx

Removes @code{xxx} from the word list, while leaving its definition in
place.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} define ( "name" -- )

Assign @code{here} as the execution token of word @code{name} and enter
the compilation state.
@end deffn

@node Values
@set SECTION Values
@subsection Values
Values are fast to read, slow to write. Use values for variables that
are rarely changed.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} value foo ( a -- )

Create value @var{foo} and set it to @var{a}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} constant bar ( a -- )

Create constant value @var{bar} and set it to @var{a}.
@end deffn

@c format used to avoid indentation
@format
@code{@var{foo}}
@end format

Fetch value of @var{foo}.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} to foo ( a -- )

Set value of @var{foo} to @var{a}.
@end deffn

@node Variables
@set SECTION Variables
@subsection Variables
Variables are faster to write to than values.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} variable bar

Define variable @var{bar}.
@end deffn

@deftypefn {@value{SECTION}} @var{bar} @@ 

Fetch value of @var{bar}.
@end deftypefn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ! 

@example
1 bar !
@end example

Set @var{bar} to 1.
@end deffn

@node Control Flow
@set SECTION Control Flow
@section @value{SECTION}
Control functions only work in compile mode, not in interpreter.
They can be nested.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} if ( flag -- @emph{conditional execution} )
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} else ( -- @emph{conditional execution} )
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} then ( -- @emph{ends @code{if}} )

@example
condition IF true-part THEN rest
@end example
@example
condition IF true-part ELSE false-part THEN rest
@end example

@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} do ( end start -- )
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} loop ( -- @emph{conditional loop} )
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} +loop ( n -- @emph{conditional loop} )

Start a loop with index @code{i} and limit. Example:

@verbatim
: print0to7 8 0 do i . loop ;
@end verbatim

@code{+loop} uses a custom increment. Example:

@verbatim
( prints odd numbers from 1 to n )
: printoddnumbers ( n -- ) 1 do i . 2 +loop ;
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} i
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} j

Variables are to be used inside @code{do} .. @code{loop} constructs.
@code{i} gives inner loop index, @code{j} gives outer loop index.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} leave

Leaves the innermost loop.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} unloop

Discards the loop-control parameters. Allows clean @code{exit} from
within a loop.

@verbatim
: xx 0 0 do unloop exit loop ;
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} begin
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} again
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} until
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} while
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} repeat

@table @code
@item begin ... again
Infinite loop.

@item BEGIN @var{loop-part} @var{condition} UNTIL

Loop until @var{condition} is true.

@item BEGIN @var{condition} WHILE @var{loop-part} REPEAT

Repeat @var{loop-part} while @var{condition} is true.
@end table
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} exit

Exit function. Typical use: @code{: X test IF EXIT THEN ... ;}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} recurse

Jump to the start of the word being compiled.
@end deffn

@deffn  {@value{SECTION}} case
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} of
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} endof
@deffnx {@value{SECTION}} endcase

Switch statements.

@verbatim
: tellno ( n -- )
case
1 of ." one" endof
2 of ." two" endof
3 of ." three" endof
." other"
endcase
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@node Input
@set SECTION Input
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} key ( -- c )

Gets one character from the keyboard.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} key? ( -- flag )

Returns true if a character is available for @code{key}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} getc ( -- c )

Consumes the next character from the input buffer and increases
@code{>in} by one. If no characters are available, the input buffer is
refilled as needed.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} char ( -- c )

Parses the next word, delimited by a space, and puts its first character
on the stack.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} >in ( -- addr )

Gives the address of a cell containing the offset in characters from the
start of the input buffer to the start of the parse area.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} refill ( -- )

Attempts to fill the input buffer from the input source.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} source ( -- caddr u )

Gives the address of, and number of characters in, the input buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} source-id ( -- n )

Returns 0 if current input is keyboard, -1 if it is a string from
@code{evaluate}, or the current file id.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} word ( delim -- addr )

Reads a word from input, using delimiter @code{delim}, and puts the
string address on the stack. If the delimiter is the space character,
non-breaking space (hex a0) will also be treated as a delimiter.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} parse-name ( name -- caddr u )

Reads a word from input, delimited by whitespace. Skips leading spaces.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} interpret ( -- value )

Interprets a word from input and puts it on the stack.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} accept ( addr u -- u )

Receive a string of at most u characters into the buffer that starts at
addr. Returns how many characters were received.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} evaluate ( addr len -- )

Makes DurexForth evaluate the given string.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} abort

Empties the data stack and performs @code{quit}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} abort" ccc" ( f -- )

If @code{f} is true, print @code{ccc} and abort.

Typical use: @code{: x ... test abort" error" ... ;}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} quit

Enters an endless loop where DurexForth interprets Forth commands from
the keyboard. The word is named "quit" since it can be used to quit a
program. It also does cleanup tasks like resetting I/O.
@end deffn

@node Editing
@set SECTION Editing
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} v filename

Opens text editor and starts editing the file named "filename". If
filename is empty and a buffer is already open, editor will pick up
where it left. Otherwise, an untitled buffer will be created.
@end deffn

@node Strings
@set SECTION Strings
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} .( text@code{)}

Print a string. Example: @code{.( foo)}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ." text@code{"}

Compile-time version of "@code{.(}". Example: @code{: foo ." bar" ;}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} s" text@code{"} ( -- caddr u )

Define a string. Compile-time only! Example: @code{s" foo"}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} count ( str -- caddr u )

Returns data address and length of the counted string str.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} type ( caddr u -- )

Prints a string.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} /string ( caddr u n -- caddr+n u-n )

Adjusts the string by n characters.
@end deffn

@node Number Formatting
@set SECTION Number Formatting
@section @value{SECTION}
For more info about number formatting, read Starting Forth!

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} @math{<}@hashchar{}

Begins the number conversion process.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} @hashchar{} ( ud -- ud )

Converts one digit and puts it in the start of the output string.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} s@hashchar{} ( ud -- ud )

Calls @hashchar{} once, and repeats until the number is zero.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} hold ( ch -- )

Inserts the char at the start of the output string.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} sign ( a -- )

If @code{a} is negative, inserts a minus sign at the start of the output
string.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} @hashchar{}@math{>} ( xd -- addr u )

Drops xd and returns the output string.
@end deffn

@node Vectored Execution
@set SECTION Vectored Execution
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ' xxx ( -- addr )

Find execution token of word @code{xxx}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} find ( cstr -- cstr 0 | xt -1 | xt 1 )

Find the definition named in the counted string cstr. If the definition
is not found, return cstr and 0, otherwise return the execution token.
If the definition is immediate, also return 1, otherwise also return -1.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} find-name ( caddr u -- 0 | nt )

Get the name token (dictionary pointer) of word named in the string, or
0 if the word is not found.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} execute ( xt -- )

Execute the execution token on top of stack.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} @math{>}xt ( addr -- xt )

Get execution token of word at adress @code{addr}.
@end deffn

@node Debugging
@set SECTION Debugging
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} words

List all defined words.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} size

@code{size foo} prints size of @code{foo}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} dump ( n -- )

Memory dump starting at address n.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} n

Continue memory dump where last one stopped.
@end deffn

@node System State
@set SECTION System State
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} latest (value)

Address of latest defined header.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} here (value)

Write position of the Forth compiler (usually first unused byte of code
space). Many C64 assemblers refer to this as program counter or
@code{*}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} pad ( -- addr )

Address of the @code{pad}, a 161-byte memory region that can be used
freely by user words. No built-in words will modify this region.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} marker name ( -- )

Creates a word that when called, forgets itself and all words that were
defined after it. Example:

@verbatim
marker forget
: x ;
forget
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} dowords ( xt -- )

Remove @code{xt} from the stack. Execute @code{xt} once for every word
in the wordlist, passing the name token @code{nt} of the word to
@code{xt}, until the wordlist is exhausted or until @code{xt} returns
false. The invoked @code{xt} has the stack effect
@code{( k * x nt -- l * x flag)}. If @code{flag} is true, @code{dowords}
will continue on to the next name, otherwise it will return.

@verbatim
\ from debug.fs
: (words) more name>string space 1 ;
: words ['] (words) dowords ;
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@node Disk I/O
@set SECTION Disk I/O
@section @value{SECTION}
@deffn {@value{SECTION}} include filename ( -- )

Load and parse file. Example: @code{include test}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} included ( filenameptr filenamelength -- )

Load and parse file.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} require filename ( -- )

Like include, except that load is skipped if the file is already loaded.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} required ( filenameptr filenamelength -- )

Like included, except that load is skipped if the file is already
loaded.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} loadb ( filenameptr filenamelength dst -- endaddr )

Load binary block to dst. Returns 0 on failure, otherwise address after
last written byte.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} saveb ( start end filenameptr filenamelength -- )

Save binary block.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} device ( device@hashchar{} -- )

Switches the active device.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} save-forth filename ( -- )

Saves the forth to the given filename.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ls ( -- )

Load disk directory to here and display, with optional drive @hashchar{} and
wildcards. Example: @code{ls \$1:*=p} Load directory, drive 1 only prg
files.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} rdir ( addr -- )

Display disk directory previously loaded to addr.
@end deffn

@menu
* DOS Commands::
* Low-Level Device I/O::
@end menu

@node DOS Commands
@subsection DOS Commands
Words for sending DOS commands to drives and reading drive status are
available by including @code{dos}.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} send-cmd ( addr length -- )

Writes the given string to secondary address 15 on the current device,
and prints the drive's response. The following example defines a word,
@code{backup} that creates a copy of @code{durexforth} called
@code{backup}:

@verbatim
        : backup s" copy0:backup=durexforth" send-cmd ;
        backup
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} dos command ( -- )

Sends @code{command} to the current device's command channel, and prints
the response. Note that the remainder of the line is treated as part of
the command. This makes it possible to refer to file names that contain
spaces, but means that @code{dos} and its command should be on their own
line, or the last words on a line. Example: @code{dos scratch0:old file}
will delete a file named ``@code{old file}''.
@end deffn

@node Low-Level Device I/O
@subsection Low-Level Device I/O
For more advanced uses, words corresponding to the standard Commodore
Kernal IO routines are available by including @code{io}.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} open ( filenameptr filenamelength file@hashchar{} secondary-addr -- ioresult )

Open a logical file.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} chkin ( file@hashchar{} -- ioresult )

Use a logical file as input device.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} chkout ( file@hashchar{} -- ioresult )

Use a logical file as output device.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} clrchn ( -- )

Resets input and output to the keyboard and screen.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} close ( file@hashchar{} -- )

Close a logical file.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} readst ( -- status )

Returns the status of the last IO operation. For serial-bus devices,
@code{\$01} = write timeout, @code{\$02} = read timeout, @code{\$40} = end
of file (EOI), @code{\$80} = device not present.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} chrin ( -- char)

Reads a character from the current input device.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} ioabort ( ioresult -- )

Handles error conditions for @code{open}, @code{chkin} and
@code{chkout}. On failure, print error message and abort.
@end deffn

As per the underlying Kernal routines, @code{chrin} does not check for
end-of-file or any other error condition. @code{readst} should be called
to ensure that the returned character is valid.

The @code{ioresult} value returned by @code{open}, @code{chkin} and
@code{chkout} is 0 on success, or a Kernal error number if an error
occurred.

Note that use of low-level device I/O may interfere with disk accesses
done by durexForth and the @code{V} editor. The following guidelines
should be followed to avoid interference:

@itemize
@item
Avoid using file numbers 15 and below (remember, any number up to 127
can be used as a file number).

@item
Only use input/output redirection (@code{chkin} and @code{chkout})
within word definitions, and ensure that @code{clrchn} is called before
exit.

@item
Close files as soon as they are no longer needed.

@item
If multiple files are open, always call @code{clrchn} to end any serial
bus transactions before calling @code{open} or switching between files
with @code{chkin} or @code{chkout}.

@end itemize

@node Compatibility
@set SECTION Compatibility
@section @value{SECTION}
The @code{compat} module contains various words that are not deemed
necessary for enjoyable DurexForth operation, but still must be provided
to comply with the Forth 2012 core standard.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} environment? ( addr u -- 0 )

Environmental query.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} cell+ ( n -- n+2 )

2+
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} cells ( n -- n*2 )

2*
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} char+ ( n -- n+1 )

1+
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} align ( -- )

No-op
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} aligned ( -- )

No-op
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} chars ( -- )

No-op
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} 2@@ ( address -- x1 x2 )

Fetch 32-bit value from address. x2 is stored at address, and x1 is
stored at address + 2.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} 2! ( x1 x2 address -- )

Store 32-bit value to address. x2 is stored at address, and x1 is stored
at address + 2.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} 2over ( a b c d -- a b c d a b )

Copies cell pair a b to top of stack.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} 2swap ( a b c d -- c d a b )

Exchanges the top two cell pairs.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} @math{>}number ( ud addr u -- ud addr2 u2 )

Converts the string in @code{addr u} to digits, using @code{BASE}, and
adds each digit into ud after multiplying it with @code{BASE}.
@code{addr2 u2} contains the part of the string that was not converted.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} @math{>}body ( xt -- addr )

Returns the data field address that belongs to the execution token.
Example use: @code{' foo >body}
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} sm/rem ( d n -- r q )

Divide double-cell number d by n, giving the symmetric quotient q and
the remainder r. Values are signed.
@end deffn

@node Kernel Calls
@set SECTION Kernel Calls
@section @value{SECTION}
Safe kernel calls may be done from Forth words using @code{sys} ( addr
-- ). The helper variables @code{ar}, @code{xr}, @code{yr} and @code{sr}
can be used to set arguments and get results through the @var{a}, @var{x}, @var{y} and
status registers.

Example: @code{'0' ar c! \$ffd2 sys} calls the CHROUT routine, which
prints @code{0} on screen.

@node Turn-key Utilities
@set SECTION Turn-key Utilities
@section @value{SECTION}
These words are available by including @code{turnkey}.

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} top ( -- addr )

Address of the top of the dictionary, default: @code{\$9fff}.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} top! ( addr -- )

Relocates the dictionary to @code{addr}. Example:

@verbatim
\ not using \$a000 block, give all memory to dictionary
\$cbff top!
@end verbatim
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} save-pack filename ( -- )

Saves a compact version of forth to the given filename.
@end deffn

@deffn {@value{SECTION}} save-prg filename ( -- )

Saves a forth program with no dictionary to filename.
@end deffn

Further details on use of these words outlined in the Turn-key Operation
section of the tutorial.

